README.md, before:

# auto-mysql-umzug

This lib is a small wrapper around the migration lib [umzug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/umzug). 
It's intention is to integrate *umzug* as easy as possible into a node backend.
The main use case is to provide an easy way to perform necessary database migrations automatically on 
startup of a node backend.

## Installation

Install it like this:

    npm install --save auto-msyql-umzug

## Basic usage

In your node backend application, call the `execute` method on startup and only after the method's returned promise
is resolved, continue starting up your application. 

The `execute` method will return a Promise. It resolves into a Boolean indicating if any migration had to be executed. So the possible resolutions of the returned Promise are:

* resolved: `true` ... database has not been up to date, at least one migration was actually executed
* resolved: `false` ... database has already been up to date, no migratio executed
* rejected: ...  an error occurred

Usage example:

```js
// before starting the app, perform database migration steps, if any
const migrate = require('auto-mysql-umzug')({
    dbName: DB_DATABASE,
    dbUser: DB_USER,
    dbPass: DB_PASSWORD
  });
  
// migrate db if it is not up to date
migrate.execute()
  .then((somethingHappened) => {
    if (somethingHappened) {
      console.log('migration was successful');
    } else {
      console.log('no migration necessary');
    }

    startApp(); // at this point - after successful migration - start your application
  })
  .catch(err => {
    console.log(`error at migration: ${err}`);

    // don't start application
    process.exit(1);
  });
```

## Configuration

You can pass a config object to the lib. It *must* contain the database credentials (`dbName`, `dbUser`, `dbPass` and optional additional options). Additionally, the option `migrationDir` can be included too.

The database table in which the installed migrations are being tracked, is called `_migrations`.

The possible options are:

* `dbName` ... name of the database
* `dbUser` ... username of the database user. User must have the necessary privileges to alter the database. For instance, the user must be allowed to create the migrations metadata table - and every migration you will create.
* `dbPass` ... password of the database user
* `dbOptions` ... an object containing additional database options. These options are passed through to [Sequelize](https://github.com/sequelize/sequelize) backend, so all options which are understood by *Sequelize*'s options property for the constructor are possible (see [here](http://docs.sequelizejs.com/class/lib/sequelize.js~Sequelize.html#instance-constructor-constructor)).
* `migrationDir` ... folder containing the migration files associated with the software version (see [umzug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/umzug) for details on migration files). It can be an absolute or relative path. In case of a relative path, it will be resolved relative to the application's main folder (`path.dirname(require.main.filename)`).  set the name of the directory which contains the migration files. Default is `migrations`.
* `migrationTable` ... name of the table which stores the executed migrations. Default is `_migrations`.

## Migration files

The migrations folder (default: folder `migrations/`) contains the migration files. Each migration file is a Javascript file which ideally contains an up and a down method, which represent a function which achieves the task and a function that reverts a task. See [umzug:migration files:format](https://www.npmjs.com/package/umzug#format) for details.

Note that the migration files are executed in the order of their filenames (sorted alphabetically). So, make sure that you either use a fixed-length numeric prefix or a timestamp (in a specific format).

When missing migrations are detected, all missing migrations are executed in the alphabetic order of their filenames.

Examples of migration files are:

    001-create-user-table.js
    002-add-some-columns.js
    003-other-things.js

or:

    2019-05-10_153731-create-user-table.js
    2019-05-12_164004-add-some-columns.js
    2019-05-13_081445-other-things.js

Whatever you choose, be sure to stick to your chosen nomenclature consistently, to ensure that the sort order is as intended.

## Mysql driver

Since the used [Sequelize](https://github.com/sequelize/sequelize) driver for using the mysql database relies on [mysql2](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql2) as mysql lib, you should use *mysql2* as a Mysql module for your application too. In most cases, this should not really be a problem because *mysql2* is mostly compatible to [mysql](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql).

Commit message:

amend README.md: describe migration methods' parameters
... describe the 2 parameters passed to each migration method:
up(query, DataTypes) and down (query, DataTypes)

README.md, after:

# auto-mysql-umzug

This lib is a small wrapper around the migration lib [umzug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/umzug). 
It's intention is to integrate *umzug* as easy as possible into a node backend.
The main use case is to provide an easy way to perform necessary database migrations automatically on 
startup of a node backend.

## Installation

Install it like this:

    npm install --save auto-msyql-umzug

## Basic usage

In your node backend application, call the `execute` method on startup and only after the method's returned promise
is resolved, continue starting up your application. 

The `execute` method will return a Promise. It resolves into a Boolean indicating if any migration had to be executed. So the possible resolutions of the returned Promise are:

* resolved: `true` ... database has not been up to date, at least one migration was actually executed
* resolved: `false` ... database has already been up to date, no migratio executed
* rejected: ...  an error occurred

Usage example:

```js
// before starting the app, perform database migration steps, if any
const migrate = require('auto-mysql-umzug')({
    dbName: DB_DATABASE,
    dbUser: DB_USER,
    dbPass: DB_PASSWORD
  });
  
// migrate db if it is not up to date
migrate.execute()
  .then((somethingHappened) => {
    if (somethingHappened) {
      console.log('migration was successful');
    } else {
      console.log('no migration necessary');
    }

    startApp(); // at this point - after successful migration - start your application
  })
  .catch(err => {
    console.log(`error at migration: ${err}`);

    // don't start application
    process.exit(1);
  });
```

## Configuration

You can pass a config object to the lib. It *must* contain the database credentials (`dbName`, `dbUser`, `dbPass` and optional additional options). Additionally, the option `migrationDir` can be included too.

The database table in which the installed migrations are being tracked, is called `_migrations`.

The possible options are:

* `dbName` ... name of the database
* `dbUser` ... username of the database user. User must have the necessary privileges to alter the database. For instance, the user must be allowed to create the migrations metadata table - and every migration you will create.
* `dbPass` ... password of the database user
* `dbOptions` ... an object containing additional database options. These options are passed through to [Sequelize](https://github.com/sequelize/sequelize) backend, so all options which are understood by *Sequelize*'s options property for the constructor are possible (see [here](http://docs.sequelizejs.com/class/lib/sequelize.js~Sequelize.html#instance-constructor-constructor)).
* `migrationDir` ... folder containing the migration files associated with the software version (see [umzug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/umzug) for details on migration files). It can be an absolute or relative path. In case of a relative path, it will be resolved relative to the application's main folder (`path.dirname(require.main.filename)`).  set the name of the directory which contains the migration files. Default is `migrations`.
* `migrationTable` ... name of the table which stores the executed migrations. Default is `_migrations`.

## Migration files

The migrations folder (default: folder `migrations/`) contains the migration files. Each migration file is a Javascript file which ideally contains an up and a down method, which represent a function which achieves the task and a function that reverts a task. See [umzug:migration files:format](https://www.npmjs.com/package/umzug#format) for details.

Note that the migration files are executed in the order of their filenames (sorted alphabetically). So, make sure that you either use a fixed-length numeric prefix or a timestamp (in a specific format).

When missing migrations are detected, all missing migrations are executed in the alphabetic order of their filenames.

Examples of migration files are:

    001-create-user-table.js
    002-add-some-columns.js
    003-other-things.js

or:

    2019-05-10_153731-create-user-table.js
    2019-05-12_164004-add-some-columns.js
    2019-05-13_081445-other-things.js

Whatever you choose, be sure to stick to your chosen nomenclature consistently to ensure that the sort order is as intended.

The arguments to the migration methods (`up()` and `down()`) are configured in this lib using Umzug's `migrations.params` property. All properties listed under `migrations.params` are passed to the migration files' methods. In this case, each migration method will be called with two parameters:

* `query` ... Sequelize's query object (which is what `Sequelize.getQueryInterface()` returns), see [Sequelize/QueryInterface](http://docs.sequelizejs.com/class/lib/query-interface.js~QueryInterface.html) for the API
* `DataTypes` ... Sequelize's constructor, see [Sequelize/DataTypes](http://docs.sequelizejs.com/variable/index.html#static-variable-DataTypes) for a description of Sequelize's data types



## Mysql driver

Since the used [Sequelize](https://github.com/sequelize/sequelize) driver for using the mysql database relies on [mysql2](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql2) as mysql lib, you should use *mysql2* as a Mysql module for your application too. In most cases, this should not really be a problem because *mysql2* is mostly compatible to [mysql](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql).
